# Transcript: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wo2m3jaJixU
# Source: youtube-captions
Welcome to my second real-time sync talk. If you haven't seen uh the first one, who has seen the first one that I've done? Almost everybody. Awesome. I'll do a quick recap on on on that talk cuz it sort of talks about the internals of how the sync engine works. Um and this talk sort of is a continuation of that. Um like I want to sort of go over sort of the challenges that we've had scaling uh the sync engine and um how it actually works um in in you know in the Linear application and what kind of changes we've made and maybe you know how the API around it has has formed you know because of these you know scaling challenges. Um and um you know to start things off with um we always want to build on strong foundations. Um the that you know holds true for the sync engine. It was literally the first thing that you know I started working on when I started dabbling around um with with Linear um now probably 5 and 1/2 years ago. Uh and we sort of spent uh an outrageous amount of time you know building out the sync engine as a startup um and usually that's not something that you know any startup would would um usually do. Like you would you know want to build out product first um in order to validate whether you're building something something good. Um but our sort of idea always has been that you know we're not really building anything new. Like we know that the market exists um and that there's you know millions and millions of users um who use um uh Oops. There you go. Lost it for a while. Um who use uh who use issue tracking project management. Um and the way for us to win is um to uh just build build something better. Um something that is you know 10x 10x of you know the incumbent solutions um out there. So we focused in the in the early days to um make sure that we have a solid foundation to to to build upon. Um and one of those things was sort of the the the sync engine. Um and it took us a while to sort of you know get to uh understand really what the benefits were. Like you know we started out as you know uh thinking about sort of the user benefits that what the user would get out of um building the entire application on to on on on a real-time sync engine um which is obviously you know the real-time aspect of it. Um you immediately see any changes that other users make. Um other things that we envisioned was that you know you would get performance uh out of the application because you know with sync um you probably don't need to go to the network uh for every single page request and and load more data. But you know you could store it locally and then um simply access it and and load it you know from the database or even have it in memory. Um and uh maybe the the last thing that we we figured is like you know if we store everything in the local database maybe we can support offline capabilities um as well. And that was pretty much sort of the um the benefits that you know um are now evident um today. I don't think you know anything any new new um new benefits were added to the to the user side. But you know what sort of came as a surprise um as we then went along and as we you know built out Linear um in in in the past years um is sort of the engineering benefits that have come out of it as well. Um the the sync is you know literally at the core of the application and it comes with you know I would at least say increased productivity uh for for our engineers. Um the the way to think about it is that um you you really don't really um need to think about networking anymore or some error handling scenarios. Um but you know much of the the complexity of of network applications just taken care you know for you by by by the engine itself. Um if you want to sort of boil it down like what you have as an engineer is um an in-memory you know model graph or graph of of of data. Um and then you present that to the user and you modify it and that's it. You don't really need to take care of anything else. Um the sync engine handles you know persisting that data making sure that um things are rolled back if in case the server doesn't accept those changes. Um or um you know making sure that you know uh changes are offlined if there's no network connect connectivity that transactions are queued up um when you know we want to send them out. Um it makes sure that you know if you have in-flight uh in-flight changes to your data model and somebody else makes change at the same time that you know your changes are rebased on top of theirs. Um and all these small things that you know otherwise you would have to implement on a case-by-case basis and for every single feature over and over again. Um I don't know how much of a saving that is. Um you know to me it feels like you know we can be two times more powerful um because of this. Um and we can just ship you know functionality and and features you know much much quicker. The uh other interesting benefit was that you know um we don't really need any servers. Well any we don't need so many servers to to run the entire application. Um and this took us a while to sort of you know realize um that you know it's very resource um Well what is the opposite of um it doesn't use many resources um on on the server side. Because the clients essentially load up the entire state of the application um locally um there are no page requests or there are no requests to the server for for every single page load. Um only mutations only changes in data um require network requests. So when a client refreshes their page um in a perfect scenario we don't make any network requests. We do make a few but you know not not not too many. So there's there's not much load on on the server when the user uses uses the application. Uh which means that you know we probably can you know run the entire Linear application on the back end with you know 10 times less servers than um than you know other applications with which would sort of have some sort of you know um network request for for every single uh page load. Um so that's a few of the benefits. Um and this is the slide that I um that I that I shared as the end result of my last sync talk um sort of detailing the the internals of um of of sync. I'll do a quick recap if you are sort of more interested in in how this how this works um you should definitely go back um to my to my previous talk and have a look. Um but in in you know in the internals of it um what you have is uh effectively an object pool of you know model objects that somehow get you know loaded up in into the client um either from sort of your local storage or you know from the network um somehow from the from the sort of back end database. And you've got this big blob and big pool of of just individual objects um that have you know properties on them. So in our use case you would have like you know organization you would have multiple teams you would have multiple issues and you would have multiple users all sort of you know randomly um in one one big pool. What the sync engine then does with with this and you know over time as well um it tries to sort of build this object graph out of um that big pool of objects. If you have for example an issue um an issue will have a property pointing to the to the team uh that this issue is associated with. And the sync engine will you know take that information and then reconstruct um a you know nicely usable object graph out of out of that data. So what you'll in the end get after this construction has been completed you will have an object at the root um which is or a model object at the root which is your organization. Um we call it organization it's actually a workspace. Um we just can't rename um our our models at this point anymore. Like we have committed to to you know talking about organizations when we actually mean workspaces. And an organization will have a collection of teams. And those teams in your object pool will have been listed into um into that collection. So you can access you know um the collection of teams which will contain all the teams in that in that object pool. Each team again will have you know a collection of issues um which contains all the issues for that for that team. Um and those again are hoisted. So what you end up using as an engineer is not the object pool but you get this nice object graph out of it. And we use MobX to um tie our interface and our UI to those um model objects in in that graph. So whenever you access um a model object we make it observable using MobX. And then when you render your view and access properties on individual model objects MobX will note that there's sort of a correlation between your view and that model objects and when that model object in any way updates um or actually when individual properties on that model object updates that's a you know uh note for MobX to re-render the view that was sort of dependent on on that model object. Um so effectively when you render your views um they will automatically stay up to date without you literally doing anything. Um there's an observable um function that you need to wrap your your component in but that's literally all you need to do in order to make your view stay up to date with all the changes in um in in uh in the model in the in the object graph. Um and that holds true for any real-time changes as well. Um the the the nice thing about this is that it you know the the sync engine doesn't care you know where those changes come from. Like if you make changes as a you know local user to any of the model objects they will be automatically be reflected in your UI. All the associated components will be re-rendered. If you have you know iterated over a list of issues you know that list of issues will be re-rendered and you you see your new issues. Um but the same holds true if if somebody sends an update from from the network. Like if another user makes a change. That change will make its way into the sort of object pool um and then it will be hoisted into that object graph and again automatically your UI updates. So, it's effectively sort of a local change to your data is the same as a network change um to your data. And you don't need to do absolutely zero in order to support that. You just render your view and all is good. Um some other pieces that are, you know, important in sort of the internal workings of of the sync engine is the transaction queue. So, when you then start making changes to the model objects, um what you literally do is you you you have your local model objects in memory, you make changes to their properties, um which are automatically reflected in the UI because of our binding, and when you then call save on that model object, the sync engine will look at that object be like, well, you changed these three properties, so let me create a transaction out of that and add it to the queue. The queue is also persisted on local disk, so in case you're offline, um we can replay those changes uh on top of um you know, your your object pool and load them up again. So, if you refresh your page, we will continue retrying all those transactions. Um but over over some course of time, those will be sent out as net network requests, like they actually will be batched up to make it a bit more optimal. Um if you make you know, changes to 10 model objects at the same time, those will all be batched up into a nice GraphQL um mutation and sent to the back end. The back end then will, you know, do whatever it does in order to validate that those changes are are good. The back end might change may make other changes as well, like it might execute some workflows in order to sort of, you know, change other model objects um uh that that are affected by by the change that the user just made. And then somehow to this through this sync resolver um in the slides, um the changes will be then broadcast back to all the clients. Um all the clients in that organization are connected to to that sync resolver. Um this is actually no longer a sync resolver. Um this was 4 years ago when it was called that. Um it's essentially just a sync server. And um all the changes will be broadcast to all the clients connected um to to that organization. Um they will be received, you know, mapped into the object pool or properties will be updated, new objects will be inserted um and saved locally on the user's disk. Also, the client made the change initially. Also, the the client that made the change initially. I can come back to sort of the life cycle of of a transaction um in a in a later slide. We can we can look at how how that how that happens. Uh but that is sort of, you know, a very brief overview on on how the sync engine works um internally. Um for the remainder of the talk, um what we can do is like we can not look at sort of uh wha- wha- whatever is on the right-hand side of things cuz, you know, this is what you as a as a user essentially see from from the from the sync engine. You see an object graph that is somehow kept, you know, in sync with all the changes that users have, and then you have, you know, your your view that is essentially a, you know, representation of that object graph. Um because the view is a function of the object graph, we can also sort of forget about it for the for the rest of the talk. You just need to know that, you know, if the object graph changes, your view automatically, you know, is kept up to date as well um with with those changes. Um and I want to sort of dive deep into like w- how we initially built out um the the the pipeline for, you know, making these changes and and keeping the clients in sync, um what problems we uncovered, um where we hit performance problems, and how we how we solved them. So, the really what a sync engine does is just two things. Um it, you know, gets the client up to speed and then, you know, it keeps the client um in sync with with all the changes. Super simple. Like um there's not too much to it. So, let's start off with um essentially the first implementation that we had uh for our sync engine. Um this is all that there there really was to it. Um we had oops, not there yet. We had um the object graph on the left. And let's say we have a new user coming in um and the user doesn't have any any local data in in the in the local database. Um what we do is we make a request to a GraphQL API to load all the data. Um you literally say like, hey, I'm a user, you know, here's my credentials, um here's my user ID, um please give me all the data for that organization. And the GraphQL API will be like, okay, let me go to the database, let me construct queries to, you know, fetch all the data that is visible to you, and let me package it up in a big JSON blob um and stringify it and send it back to the client. Client will receive it, unpack it, construct model objects out of um all the objects contained in that what we call a full bootstrap, and um then construct that that object graph uh from it. And then it will write it or flush it down into um into IndexedDB. Um that is sort of the the getting up to speed part of um of sync. Um it has some problems, we'll get to them soon cuz, you know, we run into them pretty quickly. Um but, you know, getting up to speed is essentially, you know, going to the going to the back end and loading up everything that the client can have, storing it locally on disk. Um and the next step is then to keep in sync. Like once you have loaded all that data, um you need to somehow, you know, you you don't want to load up all the data every single time again. Like you want to get delta updates um of all the changes that happen in in your workspace. So, what you then do is um as a client, um we make a web socket connection to uh a sync server, and um then the sync server starts getting updates um to to the user. Um and to answer the question like how how do transactions flow in in the system? Um the client will also make use the same GraphQL API to make changes to its its objects. Um and when a client makes a change, it will um not store it immediately in the local database cuz that, you know, change hasn't been verified yet. Like it's not it's not truthful. Um it it's a optimistic change that the client has made. We do update the UI for that on the client because we want to immediately react to any changes that the user user makes, but um we won't touch the local database yet because we don't know if um if that change will be uh will be accepted. So, we make it in memory, that change. We construct a transaction, send it to the GraphQL API. And the transaction is stored The transaction the transaction itself is stored on the client in in a local database. Yes. So, the client will store it in in a local database so that it can replay it in case the client refreshes. Um but it's just a queue of of transactions, which are essentially loaded up into memory when the client comes back online, and then one by one the client will try to send them to the GraphQL API. And the GraphQL API when it receives it, it can um either accept it or reject it. Rejection um is pretty simple, you know, you had some sort of validation error, like essentially we made a mistake, like it is on us to make sure that, you know, the the client changes or the the changes that a user can make in the client will be accepted by the back end uh because we we work with optimistic updates. We make sure to validate the data on the client side um because we immediately show those changes to the user. Um there are certain cases where that is not true, where, you know, there might be a clash with the data, some somebody might have updated data in a way where now your change is invalid. Um in that case, the server will reject that change, and the sync client um will then roll back those changes in memory to to the user. Um so, as a user, it will look like, you know, you made a change, you see the UI um updating, and then, you know, 500 milliseconds later, it will revert itself back to, you know, what it was, and you have the option to then sort of opt in to showing an error error um dialogue. Um I think we show it by default, like if if something goes wrong, um we we try to present a user presentable error sent by the back end, um and that shows up as a as a toast to let the user know that something something went wrong, and the changes that they made um have been have been rolled back. Um and the transaction queue will just, you know, make one one request at a time uh for those transactions, um and then replay those changes uh onto Postgres. Now, the GraphQL API as it writes those changes into the Postgres database, which means they're now committed, they're now, you know, part of the truth, um they will also write a um what we call sync action um to a specific table um in in that database. Um and a sync action is just, you know, a um a record of change to the data set um of a a workspace. It will have the model's ID, it will have the changed properties, um it will have indication on who who made that change and what kind of change it it is. It might be an insert, a deletion, an archival, um or an update. And then it's the role of the sync server to go to that table um and constantly read read on it. Um it the sync server will always sort of read from the end of that sync actions table, um read anything that is newly added to it, um figure out like what clients are connected to that one particular sync server, go through that list um and distribute those sync actions to the to the corresponding clients based on whether they have access to that data or not. Um and that's how, you know, through the web socket then the clients will receive updates in real time, you know, using the using the socket server. And at that point, when they receive those updates through the socket server, is when they also get written to the disk of of the client. So, nothing gets written until, you know, you receive it essentially through the sync server. Um in order to make sure that, you know, you um you don't write anything that, you know, might actually be be wrote back or if you refresh at the correct time that you don't get out of out of sync. So, if you've kicked off a transaction, for example, um and that is in flight, so you've sent it already to the server, and now you refresh your client, um what will happen is you will still have the transaction in your local database because um we haven't yet seen a response to it. It will have been applied on the back end cuz, you know, the back end received that request. It will have saved it to the local database um and written it to the sync action table. And now that your new client refreshes, um it essentially will have, you know, a conflict, which we deal with. Um we will be reading and listening in on the on the on the sync updates we get up from the from the server before we start sending transactions. And um we do have a, you know, deduplicator in there where, you know, the transaction um log that we had on disk will check if, you know, the transaction ID matches with what we got from um from from the from the socket server. If we If we If we are already were able to, you know, save the transactions that we had um to to the back end. That's not always the case. It might happen that, you know, we send it twice, which is perfectly like it's just another update with essentially the same properties. So, even in case if we if we sent the same um same update twice, um nothing would happen. Like it would not be be an unchange, um nothing would be written. Um the only, you know, thing that will happen is um if you, for example, delete an object or delete Yeah, delete an issue, for example. Um you might get two deletions, the second one of which would fail with an error because, you know, the object already has been has been deleted. So, we try to detect those um you know, um conflicts in case users refresh at the at the correct time. But, you know, even if you can't dedupe them um correctly, it's it's not a biggie. Um the user might see and just a quick error toast, um which might be a bit weird, but given that you just made a change and then refreshed, um maybe maybe it's fine as well. Um so, second time the user starts up and loads up the clients, uh we don't need to go to the server anymore. Like we have everything stored locally in in the database. And we have an up-to-date representation of that data in the database because we've been listening on all changes on on the web socket. So, what we do is um we, you know, read from the local database. It's a bit hard to see here, um but essentially we do have um a specific local specific database in IndexedDB called linear databases. It will contain um essentially a list of all the databases that the user um has at some point created. Um we might have multiple databases cuz we might have multiple workspaces that we are associated with or multiple even users on that same computer. Um so, a database name is contains them, you know, huge hash that is constructed out of multiple things. Like it will have your client ID in there. It will have, you know, um well, the organization ID is sort of, you know, unique, but the client ID is unique to the organization ID, so we don't need to add the organization ID in there. But, it will also have um you know, a version hash of of the database defined by us. Like if we if we first for some reason need to nuke the entire database, we just, you know, increment this version number, and that then will generate a very different hash for the database. So, the client will be like, "Well, I don't find that database, so let let's reconstruct the database from scratch." Um and then it will contain a number of sort of other metadata related to um to the database in in in in that field. But, you know, the client will construct, you know, this hash. Um it will then check the uh the linear databases uh database to figure out, you know, whether there's an existing database. Um and then if it finds one, it will, you know, use that database um with the appropriate hash um and read data from it. And that database contains tables for every single type of model object. Um in this case, I have no idea what what data this is or what what model object. We just hash um the model name. Um but it will contain essentially, you know, one or more key paths, um which we can use to query that data. Um the ID is always a key path, so you can always query by the the UUID of a model object. And then the value will be just, you know, a JSON blob of um the data or the serialized data of that model object, essentially containing all the properties in JSON zero format. Um there also is um a specific sort of metadata and transactions table. Transaction, you can imagine what what goes in there. Um obviously transactions will be written into that table. Um and the metadata will contain metadata information about that database. Um it will contain things like, you know, the last sync ID um that I've seen and written um to the database. And that's a concept that we have, you know, throughout in in sync. Um All the sync actions will have a, you know, um an incrementing ID going into So, from zero to to forever. Um and the each client will know which number it has seen in that sequence. Um it will say, "Well, I've received a sync packet with an ID of 57, so I know that I don't need to care about, you know, anything that came before 57 cuz everything's written into the database already." And that is also being used like, you know, in in in the next step, which will come come come to soon, to sort of let the server know what the client actually has seen already. Um it will also contain sort of, you know, fields on on what model objects we loaded. Um it might be, for example, that, you know, you um load up um in in in in one sort of session you load up all the data from a full bootstrap and everything's nicely persisted in the local database, meaning that the persistent flag is set to true on on that model object. Um but then, you know, an engineer makes a change to um for example, the the issues model. They add a property. Now, that model object is invalid. It will contain more data, and the client's data should be deleted and reloaded. Um and we use, you know, the persistent flag in here to indicate that that's that's the case. So, the next time the client then refreshes, they will um loop through all the tables and figure out their hashes, um which are stored um as essentially the table name for those model objects. And it will figure out, well, the issue hash doesn't match anymore. Like I don't have a table for the for the issue. Um it will then go into the meta table and say, you know, persistent equals false to indicate that, you know, oh, we need to load up persistent data and we need to wait for that. Um and it will then um load up, you know, data for just that one particular uh table. So, do a, you know, what we call a partial bootstrap uh for for the data. But, maybe I'm getting ahead of myself cuz, you know, that came later. Um We uh you know, that's the way how how you sort of keep um the the schema changes in sync between the clients. So, we're pretty, you know, simple with with handling schema changes. We simply delete all the data um that is part of a schema change. Um which is maybe something, you know, to to think about when you make changes. Like you want to make bigger changes in one go. You don't want to sort of, you know, do it on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday um cuz that will invalidate that a lot of data and clients will have to wait a bit longer before they before they see anything uh when that happens. Um and we, you know, maybe we could be smarter about this. If I haven't I haven't really seen seen a case where this would help much with with performance. So, to get back to like the first implementation of sync as it stand as it stood for, you know, literally one day, and then we found that, you know, it's a bit problematic. We need to add something else in there. Um and what we needed to add is delta sync. So, we we do have um a problem with with the previous slide, which means that, you know, when we do a full bootstrap, we will load up all the data from a specific time you know, time in history. And then we will connect to the web socket. Um any amount of time might happen in between. Like your network might be slow, it might take like 5 seconds to load up all that data. And 5 seconds later you connect with the web socket. Somebody might have made changes um at in in in the meantime. And the way the sync server works is that it doesn't know about history. Like it just continues forward. When it sees a new sync packet, it will send that out to all the connected clients and, you know, get over it and and continue. So, what we needed is a way for clients, like once we've once they floated up all of the data or, you know, when they come back with a refresh, to sort of quickly catch up um not with a full bootstrap, but with a with a with a delta bootstrap. Like they want to see all the changes that have happened, you know, in the meantime. While they were offline or while since they they did their bootstrap, whatever, you know, that time is, they need to catch up with all the changes. So, what the client will do is they will take that last sync ID that they had stored in the database um and send it to the sync server saying, you know, "I need all the data um since the sync ID. Like, you know, send it all to me." And the sync server will be like, "Okay, um you know, you're requesting all the data since sync ID, you know, 3,000. I know that I have sync data until the sync ID 5,000. Um so, let me query the database for all the changes for your organization, and I'll send you a big blob of data." Um it's essentially fast-forwarding the the client to that state. And after that, the client can receive um sync updates and the client is now in in sync with with the rest of the world. Um small problem. Um the sync server started uh effectively sort of, you know, burning out and becoming very very slow, crashing, and all of that. Um what we sort of didn't uh you know, in the first implementation anticipate, so and I think this implementation lasted maybe for, you know, a few months or so, um is that um delta syncs can be pretty heavy. Like a client can come back, you know, a week later. And a lot of changes might have happened since then. Like if you have an active organization with, you know, say 500 users, they come back a week later, um there will be tens of thousands of changes um to each model object. And that means tens of thousands of full changes to model objects being serialized as as JSON and send send out when a client connects. And the way the sync server worked, because it like wants to be in real time, it wants to work through these things. Whenever a new client connected, what it would do, it would pause everybody else's updates and service that one client saying, "Oh, you you need a delta sync. So, let me fetch everything. Let me then, you know, package it up, send it to you, and then I'll continue my process because now you're in sync. And now I can continue my process of reading sync actions and sending them to everybody. So, that everybody is in sync." If it had continued to send those sync actions, um you would have a problem on sort of the the client side of of things. Um and the you know, code would just be much more complicated cuz you would have this one client that we haven't sent the sync actions yet because they're still receiving the delta sync. Everybody else does, and now I need to memorize all the sync action sync actions that I've gotten um since then. And, you know, it it would just be be convoluted. So, the way we we we then fixed this is um well, let's not, you know, have the sync server be involved in sending those sync delta packets, but let's just like, you know, GraphQL. We have a nice API. We've got, you know, multiple of pods running um running on the back end. Why not just make a request um to the server? Um the GraphQL server cuz it's su- super reliable, and it can just infinitely scale. Um there's sort of no state involved uh in in the GraphQL API. So, the delta sync is made um to the GraphQL API. Now, um we we do have Yes. Um so, we still have a problem, um which is we need to add this small piece um in here. We need to add a queue. Um again, to overcome race conditions. Like when the client connects, um you might be receiving already um sync actions before you get your delta update. Um and then you might be writing things to your local disk in the incorrect order and overwrite more recent changes. Um so, with a queue, what we now do is, you know, the process of of getting up to date and then staying in sync is the client will load up all data from the back end as a full bootstrap. It will then connect the web socket to the sync server. It will start receiving sync updates, but queue them all in memory. It won't apply them anywhere. We'll just keep on adding them to this local queue. Um while that's happening, it will then make another request to the GraphQL API saying, you know, "Please give me a delta sync up until whatever the sync server told me was the last sync ID." Um cuz that's what I need. I've seen everything else, and I'm keeping that queue up and running. Um but I need that delta in order to catch up to whatever the sync server is has started sending me. We receive that from the GraphQL API. We apply it to the local database. Then we flush the queue to the local database, and now we're real time. Now, every single, you know, sync update that we get um from the sync server will be applied in real time to the local database. And everything's fine. So, um and this was probably the the the diagram that we used for probably the first year um or so. And um then we started growing. Uh and as you grow, fun things happen. Um so, the first problem that we run into um was, man, bootstrap is taking ages on the client. Um unexpected. Like I would have thought that, you know, the GraphQL API is um is something that would be hit first, but we actually started seeing that, you know, it's a bit slow to sort of launch the client when you have a lot of data. Um and, you know, super annoying. I don't I don't really want to want to sort of wait ages um for for for a normal refresh. Um and the reason for this was simply, you know, if you load up all the data in your local database, you know, that might be on a big organization like 80,000 or 100,000 individual model objects. You load them up from disk, which is relatively fast, but then you construct them into objects, and you add MobX on top of that, and that is actually pretty slow. Um so, we need to change um you know, a few things. So, the the first thing that we did was um like we we came up with what we now call partial um uh partial bootstrap. So, we say, you know, we we we no longer like really need to load up everything um from the local uh database. But um we can wait on some of the stuff. Like it doesn't have to be um all all loaded um in in time. And um the uh the way like the reasoning here was that uh if you look at the application, like you have certain model objects like, you know, comments and issue history that are not really shown in um in the application until you get to a certain screen. Like comments and issue history are only shown when you look at that issue at an individual issue. Um and most of the time users start with, you know, the active issues or my issues um screen. Um so, we don't really need to sort of bootstrap all of these all of these objects um you know, necessarily. Um so, how how do we do that? Um cuz on the client side, like we need to implement something in order to then dynamically load these model objects when when needed. Um and it's not really a um well, like we don't want to make it more complex for for for the engineers um than than needed. Um we want to make sure that, you know, you don't really have to change anything how you how you use the the structured data in order for us to optimize how we load up the load up the client. So, the way internally um you know, the the the collections um work is that, you know, you will have a team, which will have a property called, for example, issues, which will be a collection. And, you know, from the get-go, we we created this our own class to hold collections cuz we anticipated that we will have to, you know, at some point optimize how we access those collections, and we want to be in control of what happens when when a user access or when a when a engineer accesses that collection. Um and um in in in the early days, like your tree would already sort of have all the all the data um in in those collections. So, a team would have all the issues. Uh sorry. Uh yeah, a team would have all the issues, and an issue would have all the all the comments associated with it because we would load up everything from the local database. Now, we wanted to delay that, and we want to make it lazy. Um so, what we introduced was a lazy collection, um which is a subclass of of the collection. It works in the same way. Um as an engineer, you don't really need to know which one you're accessing. Um it has the same accessors to sort of, you know, get all the elements of that collection or find things um in in the collection. Um and we simply said, "Well, let's take, you know, let's start easy. Let's start just with the comments and issue history. Um and let's make um the comments collection on uh on the issue lazy loaded." Um and what that means is um if you, you know, access comments, like if you in code, you access the the the property of, you know, team uh issue.comments, um the sync engine will notice. Um it's it's a getter, um and it will know that, "Oh, okay. So, you know, you now want to sort of access the elements of that collection. Um let me check if they're actually loaded. Um and if not, let me then actually go quickly to the database and and load them up." So, what will then happen is um you know, if they are not loaded, which they are not when you when you start the application, um we will go to next DB, um load them up, populate them, um and then, you know, get back to the get get get back to the user. So, how could we do this without making any changes to how you access the data structure? Cuz in first time, they don't exist, and then they do exist. Um it's not really any different from um you know, somebody updating a collection. Like the first time you access the user you access the collection as an engineer, um you will get zero elements back. You'll get an empty empty array if you access the elements of of that collection. Um but then, like a millisecond later, oh, you'll get another update saying, "Oh, there's now data in there." Which looks like a, you know, somebody updating them through the network, for example, or you making changes yourself. Um so, when they are hydrated um into the collection, um again, MobX will kick off going, "Hey, this collection changed." And any any UI that access that collection will re-render, and you will now see those those um those elements in that collection. Which if you don't do anything else, um it will work. So, eventually um and very quickly, you will get those comments um in an in an issue, but there's still a flash. Like there's still, you know, two renders for any section that that show comments. Um you will first see no comments, and then immediately later, you you'll see some comments. Um and we do have tooling to get over that, so you can if you know that, you know, a collection is um is is lazy, you can kick off hydration beforehand, or you can, you know, wait for hydration to happen. Um and hydration generally means sort of, you know, going at this point to the local database. In the future, it might be, you know, going to the network as well. Uh but it means that you get a promise back, um and then that is fulfilled, then you know that, you know, everything's hydrated. So, what we do in code is we add suspend suspense boundaries around anything that we sort of lazy load. Um we don't need to show a spinner, uh but what we do want to do is like nicely fade it very quickly in when when that happens. So, we don't want to render a viewer, you don't see any comments cuz that might mean displaying the text no comments, uh for for example. So, we want to not render anything um while the hydration happens. And when that promise then resolves, um the suspense boundary will re-render that component and be quickly faded faded in nicely rendered with with all the comments in place. So, that's why when you sort of very quickly, like if you're super fast and you go to an issue and go to the section, you will see the comments fade in um in that section. Um we also do sort of, you know, all this hydration beforehand. You roll over a list component um in an issue, we already kick off that hydration cuz we anticipate that the user might be clicking on that element. So, when they then do, the comments are already there, so we can immediately render them. We don't need to fade anything in. Um and if this, you know, when this was correctly implemented, like there would be no, you know, no discernible change to the to the user um UI and the user wouldn't really see see anything. Um what they would see is that, you know, suddenly we would ship much faster. So, that's what we did with um, you know, uh the uh the the first bottle neck bottle neck fix we we implemented partial boots partial bootstrap um from from the local database. The other thing that we did was um just optimize how we how we um serialize MobX on those model objects. Cuz as I said, you know, that is a very slow operation. It takes time to make an object observable. Um and previously we would did it do it for all these model objects. And now we actually do it only when we access those model objects. So, when we um when we find them by by ID, for example, or when we access a collection, um that's when we create um or make them observable, which made made it much faster um to bootstrap as well. So, yeah, um next problem. Um uh the the bootstrap itself when we load up everything is is quite slow. So, we fixed it for our local database and then obviously moved the problem um to to the next um bottle neck, which was the GraphQL APIs are actually actually pretty slow um at doing doing things. Well, we already have the ability sort of delay things loading up from local disk, so we don't really need to load up everything in in one go. Um so, what we then did is we um added a delayed bootstrap to the startup sequence. So, we do a main bootstrap, which is loading up most of the models, like everything that is important, like teams, organizations, users, issues, um whatever is usually rendered uh at at at the first time. But we moved everything else into delayed bootstrap. Um what went in there was, I think, comments and issue history in the beginning. Again, those are models that are, you know, they're plentiful. Um they're they're very many issue history elements, like probably, you know, 10 per issue, so they're they're super heavy. Um and just delaying loading of that um and rendering the UI before we even get to load up the comments um made things much faster. So, now bootstrap was fast again. And we want to get to UI very quickly and then catch up with, you know, whatever they the user user has. Um so, they the way this works with those lazy collections um is that, you know, we just added uh you know, quick check into the lazy collection saying, you know, if you don't see them in the local database, um we might actually be still bootstrapping them. So, the call to load them lazy uh load them delayed might still be on ongoing. So, let's wait for that. Uh so, the pre- promise wouldn't fire until we've actually loaded up the the delayed bootstraps. And um then we would go to the next DB and check, you know, what do we have as comments and issue history for for for this. And that made things, you know, a lot faster, probably like, you know, five times faster bootstrap um to to to get done with. Well, then we moved the problem just to the next place. So, the next problem that we started ha- started having was um that uh the GraphQL API started um not being slow, but um crashing. And um you know, we're a bit dumbfounded at first, but then quickly realized that uh we were just running out of memory. Um and the reason for this was like, you know, GraphQL is um is good for small operations, but it's really really bad for huge operations um cuz the way GraphQL works is before it can send anything to the client, it needs to sort of have constructed the entire response locally in memory. Um it cannot stream anything. Um it's a JSON blob and the the response is a big JSON blob and, you know, you need to have all the data present before you can construct that response and send it to the client. So, the way the GraphQL bootstrap would work is it would go to the database. It would load up everything for the user. It would have that data then, you know, in memory. It would then construct essentially, you know, the GraphQL response, which is, you know, a big JSON serialization of all that data. And it would have that data now twice in memory. Um and it would then send it to the user while keeping all of that in memory. And once the user had received the entire block, which might, you know, take a long time because networking is slow, um that's when, you know, those big memory blobs were effectively removed. So, if you loaded up, you know, um a data set of, you know, 50 megabytes, which is fine, like compressed that's much less, but, you know, I think even the linear workspace today uncompressed might be something like um 150 megabytes. Um you would have to keep that all in memory um for one single bootstrap request. Um so, if you make, you know, I don't know, 20 bootstrap requests at the same time, you'll run out of memory cuz we've set the limit at 2 gigabytes um of memory for our pods. Um so, not very good. So, we need to find a solution um to this. And what we did is we introduced a new thing. Uh we introduced the streaming REST endpoint. Um so, GraphQL can't do streaming, um REST can. So, we added a new new endpoints um that is sort of internal to us. It's not public facing. And only the client uses it uses it. And what it will do is like, you know, the client will make, you know, instead of going to the GraphQL API, it will now make the same request to the streaming REST endpoint. The streaming REST endpoint will make create a streaming database connection to the database with the big query. Like, there is one big huge query that contains um you know, everything that is needed in order to load all the data for that user from from the database. Um it will then stream the re- response row at row by row from the database to the API and then immediately send it over to the client. Um so, it won't really need much memory. Um if the client is fast, like it will essentially, you know, read, you know, a few rows at a time keep in memory cuz then it sends to the client and the client accepts them. Um so, they can be removed from from memory. Um in order to account for sort of slower clients cuz what might what might have happen is like your database, like we want to load stuff from the database as quickly as possible in order to keep keep the connection count low. Um so, we might load up a lot of stuff from the database and have everything in memory and because the client is slow, we we're not able to send it as quickly to the client, so we have to again keep stuff in memory. So, what we added in there is to write things to disk in in certain cases. So, we receive it from the from the database. If we go over a certain border mark in our memory, we start, you know, streaming them to disk. And from disk, we stream them to to the client back. And that led us um to, you know, not only um be sort of um have the ability to service more clients, but also be faster. Um I don't remember how how much of an improvement that was in terms of speed, but it it was substantial. Um and it was much faster to do a full bootstrap with. So, nice. Um we're in a place, you know, pretty good place. Everything is is, you know, going well. Um and then, you know, if you saw like how that flame has moved around, obviously like we've we've now fixed the streaming REST endpoint. And then, you know, the flame reaches the Postgres database itself. Um cuz we've just moved sort of loads um over um to to to the next place in in in time. So, the problem here was that, you know, those bootstraps were becoming very hard um on the database. We had no problems catching up with mutations and all the changes that clients were making, but clients were making, you know, full bootstrap requests pretty often and we were increasing uh our user counts. So, um the database started sort of just going going nuts. We increased the size of the database um to you know, a huge one um and still sort of, you know, had problems with it. So, the first obvious choice is to, you know, just read from the read replica. Um we don't need to read from the main database, but we can go to the read replica for those full bootstrap requests. Not as simple as it sounds cuz, you know, the read replica can be a bit late to the party. Um like it it it can have lag um even like if you run a huge query on on the replica, it can be out of sync by, you know, as much as 10 minutes. Um so, we need to figure out like how the client knows like what it has loaded and account for that in the delta sync, so it became a bit more complicated where full bootstrap would now have to tell the client like, okay, you got everything, but, you know, only up until this delta or until this sync ID. So, when you do your delta sync, load up from from there. Um not too bad. Um worked out for some time, but then, you know, again, the read replica um wasn't able to handle um all all load. Um and we were in certain cases still going to the main database. Um and um we wanted to sort of find a better solution. Um not that, you know, the database was was, you know, on fire anymore, but, you know, it was slow. Um like it started getting slower and slower doing these huge queries. A relational database um is great for certain cases to load up everything that, you know, goes into a huge organization. Um that's what a relational database is not good for. Um so, what we what you what do you do? Um then you you add a cache. Um and what we started doing is adding a new database, a database in there. We tried a few things. Um we we, you know, tried a side-by-side, you know, a approach and Bigtable uh with GCP. Um and it turns out that was actually quite a bit faster um than Bigtable from Google. So, you know, we still are running on on Um and what we do is we periodically, you know, save all the data in, you know, a specific serialized format to So, we take organization by organization, we go, you know, I think um every single day we go through the entire uh through all orgs, or we might be, you know, more smart about that nowadays where we only do it if if necessary, like if the organization has enough changes. That's when we sort of do this big dump. Um we take all the model objects for all the users, we serialize them nicely, and put them all next to each other in the database so that reads are super fast. And instead of, you know, streaming from the Postgres database, we stream from that DB. Again, the DB it is a bit older, the data, like it's not up-to-date, but, you know, we have all the mechanisms in place uh for the client to actually catch up with that data. So, we the the the um data that we write into that  DB will also contain like the last sync ID at which it was generated. Um and then the client can can can catch up um with delta sync. Alex. Always always from DB, right now? Um it Well, no, it's not al- always from  DB. So, the the uh the streaming endpoint will make a distinction between like where where to go to. And it's quite complicated. Um what it will do is um like to to simplify it, like it will check if there's a valid, you know, um uh valid dump in DB. And if it's not too old, then it will go there. If there's no dump, it will um do it from Postgres, but at the same time will generate that dump. Um I'm not exactly sure like whether we ever wait for that dump to be generated then read from there. There might be something where we wait like for 5 seconds and then try to read the dump. If not, then we just go to the main database. It's a bit more complicated. Some it's all in code. Um but in the end like we make the best, you know, possible distinction of where where to load that that data from. And it's all sort of abstracted away. Like you don't need to really care where it's where it's coming from. Delta sync always goes to Postgres? Um delta sync in this graph always goes to Postgres, yeah. Yeah. It's Uh no, sorry. So, we moved delta sync to the streaming rest endpoint as well. So, um and that goes to Postgres, yes. Yeah. Um we played around with going to the read replica as well, but, you know, delta sync needs to be real time, so it's it's it's much more complicated than um I think we had something in place where we would read from both the replica and the main database. Like from the replica the the bulk of it and then everything else from the main database. Um but, you know, we've got some new things coming on on that front as well. So, the next problem. Finally, Postgres done, backend all cool. Um you know, oh, that it streaming rest endpoint is a bit slow again on the client. God damn it. Um we're loading up a lot of lot of data. Um even with sort of our delayed sync and and um all of that, it it's still a lot of data to load. Tons of uh megabytes um for large organizations specifically. Like I think our organization, even though it's, you know, pretty pretty big, um it's still working nicely and fine, and, you know, takes a few seconds, three, four seconds to load all all the data set. But when you get to sort of larger growth organizations, um definitely not up to par. Like we want to be be faster um at at loading up that full bootstrap. Um so, what can you do? Like turns out we have essentially all the mechanisms, you know, under the hood already in place in order to do something, you know, really nice and smart and cool. And that's actually what we're working on today. Um hopefully, you know, getting this out there. I don't want to make any promises anymore because we've we've, you know, pushed the boundary back so so often. It's a hugely complex task. Um but what we're doing is we add a batch loader um in between. Um and the best way to describe, you know, sort of a batch loader in in in in this diagram is that um we do um a partial bootstrap when we load up the the client's data, and we load up only the absolutely necessary data. Um the data that, you know, every client will see on on every single page on on on the first page. Um or the data that, you know, doesn't have, you know, tens of thousands um of entities. Um and that, you know, essentially includes, you know, organization, teams, um users, um no longer issues, no longer attachments, um obviously not comments and issue history items. And there might be others as well that that we don't load. Um and um everything else is essentially pushed to the to the partial um uh to the batch loader. And the best way to describe a batch loader is essentially um an a way to stream data in on demand from from the network. Um to quickly describe, you know, what that sort of means, let's go back to this, you know, graph that we had earlier when we did lazy collections. And let's look at um the teams now. So, now we do have um uh a team that no longer has issues. So, if you see um if you go to an to a team page with active issues, the first render will be that you get a empty list of issues. Which was previously the case as well cuz we already had moved sort of um issue loading to be lazy, um but it would always load them load them from disk um cuz that was sort of the next, you know, um way to to make things faster at bootstrap on the on the client side. Um but now we might not even have those things on on um on disk. So, what we're saying is as part of, you know, full bootstrap, we're no longer loading any issues. We're we just get rid of them. Um same goes for attachments. So, how do we deal with this? So, again, you know, you come in and you touch um you know, the issues of of a user or the issues of a team. Um and what the system will try to do, it will, you know, as lazy collections do, they will go to the index DB, and they will try to load up all the data from from the from the local disk. Um but, you know, there might be a case where um you know, there is no data in in the local disk. And we have, you know, quite a few mechanisms in order to figure out like how whether there's data or whether there is not data. Um it's complex. I don't want to go into the details, but it it uses what we call, you know, partial index values. Um we know if we have loaded up all the issues, for example, for a user or for a team, um or for the entire organization. Um and we write those to disk as well. So, we can, you know, ask the disk whether we've actually even loaded up these these models. And um if if we haven't, um we will actually the the the collection itself will make a call um to the batch loader and ask sort of the API um to fulfill that request. It will go to the streaming endpoint saying, "Oh, hey, I'm looking at, you know, issues for this team. Um please give me all the issues for this team." And the streaming endpoint will gladly give them all the issues. Um and they will then be stored into the local database. Um and then um obviously the clients will be uh uh will be fulfilled as well. Um and now we suddenly you have, you know, all the issues for the for the team and um the user. The reason we call it batch loader is because it does batch loading. Um the first problem that we saw with this, like our our first implementation was simply like, "Yeah, when somebody requests anything, you know, just make a network request, load it up." Um then we were looking at the first list of issues, and every single issue can have an attachment. And it's a and can have multiple attachments. And every um you know, the attachment property is a collection. And it's obviously empty. Um and we don't know if it's loaded or not. So, we actually have to touch it because um the issue will display um the issue row in in a list will display attachments. Um like, you know, uh GitHub requests that are pull requests that have been associated with the issue. So, every issue row that we render, we will touch the attachments collection to see if, you know, oh, are there any attachments in in this collection? Um all the attachments are partially loaded, um which means that, you know, we will make network requests for every single one. And suddenly you look at one view and you get 50 network requests being sent out. Individually, those come back all saying, "Ah, no, no attachments here." So, what we created is a batch loader, which will, over time for 50 milliseconds, get all the requests in, um figure out like what is being requested, give back a promise for each of these requests, um then batch them up. It will do awesome things like sort of deduplicating those requests, um grouping them together, even in the future optimizing them. Like if you're asking for, you know, attachments for, you know, 50 issues in in one go, um maybe it's easier to just load up all the attachments for that team that the issues are involved in. So, we can do, you know, be be smart about this as well. Um and anything else in the interface that, you know, um touches any of these lazy models will essentially be batched together. And the batch loader will take up all these requests, dedupe them, make sure to figure out like what the optimist optimal requests are that we can send to the back end, combine them all into one, and then make one single network request, um and the back end streaming endpoint will sort of, you know, uh look at the request, um and fulfill it. Um there might be multiple query database queries that the back end does, but there's only one single network request that goes out. We'll get a bunch of models back, um all sort of mishmashed, you know, together, um and once we've received them, we can tell all the all the requestees that, you know, they've now been fulfilled. Like all the collections that they um uh that they wanted to populate have now been populated, so they can go about their own way. Um suspense boundaries will, you know, be be lifted, um and, you know, UI will will render again. Um and that's our way to to get um uh to get to get this working, you know, at at scale. Yes, Alex. Does that mean we should like use more like suspense boundaries now, and like just prevent multiple renders of the components? Um yes and no. Um so, the the the way we've set it up for now, and we're still working on this, um is to have suspense boundaries in in very, you know, certain places, and make sure that we do kick off hydration before you even even get, you know, to to some place. For example, like when you look at a team, we will do we will kick off. Like we will ask the batch loader to load up all the issues and attachments for that team. Um So, people on Um I I I can't answer the question cuz I actually don't know the answer for. Like what happens in code? Like there should be multiple things that will now ask for issues. Like you will access the team's issues, which will kick off a a request. Then you will have, you know, some requests that will ask for the issues and attachments to be loaded using partial load because that is faster we can go to the cache with that. And then the batch loader will look at both of these requests, be like, "Well, you know, this partial batch load I can fulfills also this request, so I can throw out this request. I only need to do this in order to fulfill, you know, all the requests." So, there's a lot of deduping going on. You don't really need to care. Like you just request whatever you want, and, you know, you'll you'll get it in in an optimized optimized way. And all of this like was required in order to make the use case of, you know, loading issues from the network um possible. But the beautiful thing is that um again, nothing in in code changed. Like you already had um your collections, you know, be lazy. They would previously be loaded from from local disk. Um and now they're just, you know, might be loaded from the network. Like it will it will take a bit longer, but, you know, from a from a engineering standpoint or code standpoint, nothing has changed. It's it's still the same same request um that that you do. But for the user it's now longer, right? For the user it's definitely longer, yes. will not notice. Um we'll have to see. Like I think we are our suspense boundaries do have a loader after 4 seconds, um but we're not really hitting that. Like we want to keep every load um still sort of under 500 milliseconds or a a you know, a second, depending obviously on the on the on the load of the user. And we might do optimizations where we not load all the issues, but, you know, start streaming them in or or whatnot. Um but that's where where we are. And to sort of quickly jump into um into some code to sort of demonstrate like the APIs um around this lazy loading because they become more important. Um this is a super simplified model of an issue. Um it has an ID property. Um it has a parent, um an optional parent, um and it might have children. So, we have sub issues, which are represented in code as, you know, with the children property, and a parent would be like, you know, if you're a child, um your parent will point to the parent issue. Um now, this is how it would look like um if the issue wasn't lazy loaded, like if the issue would always be be in memory. Um and the changes that, you know, we need to do in order um to support um lazy loading, um not only network lazy loading, but also lazy loading from from an IndexedDB, um is is the ones in yellow. So, suddenly your parent actually becomes the cached promise. Um and a cached promise is, you know, our implementation of essentially a promise with one additional thing. It has a value property that you can read. Um if it has been fulfilled, the value property will will be will be set. Um if it hasn't, it it won't be set. Um so, if you're if you're trying to access it, like you don't know if it's if it's being set, it's perfectly fine to just, you know, access the value, just make that accessor optional. Um and again, MobX will make sure that, you know, your component gets re-rendered if that is ever fulfilled. Um you might get a small flash, obviously because, you know, the loading might take time, um or you can, you know, definitely check um and make sure that you um you resolve that promise, in which case you what you get back um is uh is a hydrated version of um of that parent. So, you we do have another sort of method that we added, which is the hydrate method, which will return you a promise of a hydrated issue. Um and literally what that means, like it's this is all TypeScript stuff. Like there's nothing inherently like no objects involved um that changes. Like when you um when you call hydrate, it's effectively at runtime what you get back is um is a promise. Um but we type it to be a promise of a hydrated issue. And hydrated um is a definition that we have done here, um rather hard to read, but what it literally does, it goes through your objects, looks at every single property, if it is a um a cached promise, and if it is, it will set the value to be non-optional. So, the value is set after it has been hydrated. And that's how we how we do sort of type-safe um accessors for these for these validating functions. Again, you have two options. You can either just call the value, um and, you know, either get it back or not. You have to, you know, make it optional at that point. Or you can specifically say, you know, "Hey, I I really want to hydrate this thing, and then I get back a hydrated object." And a hydrated object also will have all your collections, you know, be hydrated um at the same time. But because collections don't really change in in their behavior, like they're either be empty if they're not hydrated, or they will contain items if they are, um we don't need to make any changes to the to the interface for for those collections.
